>> Brian Holt: We're gonna
start writing some HTML now,
which is gonna be super exciting.
>> Brian Holt: So
this is the raw building materials, right?
So we're actually gonna pile up our lumber
in front of our house before we start
building it.
So HTML stands for
hypertext markup language.
I had to look that up because I
can never remember what it is.
Or in other words, it's not important
what it stands for, it's HTML.
[LAUGH] So, like I said before,
you don't run HTML,
HTML is like speaking English, right?
You're literally just
describing what you want, and
you have a browser that just reads it and
kind of just displays it as it is.
>> Brian Holt: So it is static, which is
the opposite of dynamic, it is unchanging,
it's just, here's HTML,
it's presenting you with an essay, right?
Your essay doesn't execute anything,
it's just an essay.
>> Brian Holt: So
the basic building block of HTML is a tag.
Or you'll hear me sometimes
use the world element as well.
An element is one specific
instance of a tag, and
we'll kind of explain
that as I go forward.
But let's just get into an example,
I think that's the best way to learn.
So here I have this h1, right?
So this is called an angle bracket,
then h1,
which is the type of tag this is,
right, so this is an h1 tag.
Then you have your text inside of it, and
then here we have the closing h1 tag,
which is, you can tell it's angle
bracket slash, then the tag, and
then a closing angle bracket.
>> Brian Holt: So I'll talk about what an
h1 specifically here in just a second, but
I want you to get familiar with
the premise of what a tag is.
So this is basically saying that I
have this header, this h1, right?
This is the text that's inside of there,
and this is where it ends right?
So you can see here,
this is the title to my document.
Again this is editable so
you can put things in here and
you'll instantly see it inside of there.
>> Brian Holt: So,
>> Brian Holt: This is how HTML operates,
it's just a bunch of tags with
stuff inside of it, right?
In this case,
we just have text inside of it, but
often tags will have
other tags inside of it.
>> Brian Holt: So
when it's rendered out to the browser,
this is what it looks like.
So an h1 specifically is a header,
right, that 's what the h stands for.
And the h1, the 1 part of it means
it's the most important one for
whatever section it's in, right?
There's also h2s,
which are the second level, right?
As you might imagine, you can have an h1,
that's like the title of the page, and
then you might have multiple subsections,
right?
Maybe you have a blog, and
you have multiple blog posts.
And each one of those titles of those blog
posts might be h2s, for example, right?
So it's the second most important level.
It's not that you can't have multiple h2s,
you can even have multiple h1s,
that's fine too.
>> Brian Holt: But
it's kind of a hierarchy, right?
So you're saying that when
you say something as an h2,
it's not as important as the h1.
And again, this goes all the way
down to actually h6, there's no h7.
I'm sorry, it's just hopefully
you don't have six different,
I don't think I've actually have used
an h6 on a website that I've written.
Maybe I'm doing something wrong,
but no, not typically.
I think I've used an h3 before,
I don't think I've gone any lower than h3.
>> Brian Holt: Okay, so
this is the base layer of what HTML is,
it's just a bunch of tags,
that's really about it.
[LAUGH] So
that's what this looks like as the h1
right there, and that in and
of itself is a h1.
>> Brian Holt: So it's bigger and it's
bolder because that's what browsers do
with h1s, they make things big and bold.
The browser has a bunch of defaults of
what it thinks an h1 should look like.
Now when we get into CSS, we'll figure
out later how to make it look like
other things, but just by putting an h1
on the page, that's what it does.
That's what the browser does,
that's what it's supposed to
do is make it big and bold.
And you'll notice when I was up here
messing around with this, when I put h1,
it was really big, right?
When I put h3 or h2,
it gets smaller each time, right?
Down to h6, which is just a little
bit bigger than normal text.
>> Brian Holt: So like I said, with CSS,
you can change these things to make
them look and act differently, right?
So why is it actually important that
we're using the correct tag, right?
Why am I using h1 if it is ultimately
meaningless if I can change the way it
looks?
Well the reason why it actually
ends up being really important for
a couple reasons.
The first and foremost one, and
I would deem the most important one,
is that it makes this website more
accessible to people that are not using
the website like you do,
or maybe you do, right?
So there's things like screen readers,
right, for people that are blind, or
hard of seeing, or otherwise
permanently or temporarily disabled.
They'll have these screen readers that'll
go through, and it'll actually look for
the h1s on the page.
It's like, here are the important
parts of this website.
And so it's being used in ways that you
probably don't necessarily anticipate.
So it's actually up to you as the
developer to just use good practices, and
say okay, if this is the most
important part of the section,
I'm gonna use an h1 here.
It's really, really important because
the web is for everyone, right?
It's not for just seeing people,
it's for everyone.
That's one of actually the fundamental
tenants of the web is that it's for
everyone.
So make sure you're
doing things like that,
because it really is an ethical issue.
Beyond that, it's also good for
like Google and Bing and Duck Duck Go and
things like that.
That's how they're actually
looking at your website.
It's like okay, here's your h1, this is
actually probably pretty important to it.
And so they use that when they're kind of
crawling your websites to determine where
you're ranked, and how you're ranked,
and what keywords you rank for, and
things like that.
So that's another reason
why it's really important.
And then lastly, it's actually for
your future self and
your colleagues that will be
working on the same code as you.
You're gonna write this code, and then
six months later you're gonna come back,
it's like,
what the hell did I write, right?
That always happens, [LAUGH] that's
why it's really important for
you to write code that makes sense, right?
Because when you come back later,
you want it to be descriptive, so
that when you read it,
it makes sense to you.
A little known fact is that code is
actually more meant for you than it is for
the machine.
You're just basically taking notes in such
a way that the computer can understand it.
[LAUGH] That's really what
code is at the end of the day.
It's notes that the computer can exercise,
or that it can execute, but
you can understand when you come
back later to make changes to it.
That's the point of writing good code is
so that you can make it more readable and
easier to modify later by yourself and
by others.
So use good HTML,
it's worth the thought that you put
into it make sure that it's good HTML.
>> Brian Holt: Let's see what else.
>> Brian Holt: The other thing is
that when you write things like this,
when you write good HTML,
that you end up making your code reusable.
Which is something that we as
developers strive a lot to do,
is to make our code reusable.
What's really nice about that is,
if I make this really nice h1 that matches
the style of my website and
all that kind of stuff.
When I go later and I make another
webpage, I can just reuse that same h1.
And not have to do any additional work.
We'll get into that with CSS,
and how we're able to do that.
But if you use good coding styles you'll
end up making parts of your code reusable,
which makes you able to go faster.
And less prone to bugs, that's
another thing that's really important.
So hopefully I've explained to you at
least a little bit why it's important to
put a little bit of thought into HTML, and
not just make everything a div,
or whatever it is.
>> Brian Holt: So, a tag,
whether it's opening or
closing, is surrounded by angle brackets.
100% of the time all tags
are surrounded by angle brackets.
So h1's, inputs, all that kind of stuff,
this is what you're looking for
when you're reading HTML, are the opening
and closing angle brackets.
>> Brian Holt: Closing tags always have
a slash right here after the opening angle
bracket, that's how you
know it's a closing tag.
Lastly, you have things that are called
void tags, or self-closing tags,
and you'll see that slash here at the end
next to the closing angle bracket.
These are tags that open and
close themselves, right,
so they are self contained units.
We'll explain here in a second
why you would have that, but
just know you'll have both
self closing tags, and
then you'll also have tags that open and
then close eventually, right?
So this one right here opens here,
closes here, right?
>> Brian Holt: It's really
important that you basically treat
these like parentheses, right?
That if you have an opening parenthesis,
you need to close it before you close
any of the other parentheses, right?
So, if I have parentheses like that,
that's really hard to see,
it's easier to see up there.
If I had a square bracket there,
I wouldn't close it like that, right,
that doesn't really make any sense.
>> Brian Holt: Maybe I'll make it
a little bit bigger just temporarily, so
you can see what I'm talking about,
this what I'm talking about.
>> Brian Holt: So,
if you're doing parentheses,
you would have parentheses
on the interior,
and then you would have square brackets on
the outside, that would make sense, right?
So, you have to close
the last one that was opened,
that's basically what I'm saying here.
So, if I have an h1 here that opens,
I can't close the div,
I have to close the h1 first.
So like you see here, where I have the h1
here and the div here, this is wrong,
this is not valid HTML.
So this h1 has to close before I can
close this div, that make sense?
That's just one of the rules of HTML.
>> Brian Holt: So, I'll talk about
divs here in a second, at the end,
we go over a lot of tags.
>> Brian Holt: Cool,
so a self closing tag,
I am just going to put it right here,
something like an input.
>> Brian Holt: So you can say here,
this is a text box, right?
The way that you make this text box
on this page is with this input tag,
right, that's what it does.
It allows the user to input stuff
into like a website so that you
eventually that HTML, or whatever the user
puts there, can be sent to you, right?
So it makes sense that this
is a self closing tag,
you wouldn't actually have
anything inside of it.
That wouldn't make any sense right,
because this is like one atomic
unit that cannot be split apart.
So that's kind of what these
self closing tags are,
they're things that really
just can't be split apart.
All right, there's nothing inside of it,
it doesn't make any sense to have anything
other than a self closing tag there.
So you see here that's what
this trailing slash here means,
it means this is a self closing tax.
Unfortunately to make this
a little bit more confusing,
you actually don't have
to push that slash there.
So you can have an input like this,
this is actually a valid HTML.
>> Brian Holt: So it is in fact optional,
but no matter what,
input tags are always self closing.
And there's several others
that are that way, but for
now we'll just talk about inputs.
Any questions about HTML so far?
>> off screen female: So actually,
if you the slash at the end of
input you have a space before it?
>> Brian Holt: Yeah, I think that's
just like a stylistic preference,
I think that's technically fine.
>> off screen male: You don't need it?
>> Brian Holt: You don't need it, yeah.
I always put it there,
I don't know if I have a good reason.
Habit, I suppose,
[LAUGH] that's a good question, yeah?
>> off screen female: So, for
best practices should you use
the closing slash, or skip it, or
is that really just stylistic preferences?
>> Brian Holt: I think the answer to
the question is stylistic preference.
I used to not ever put the slash,
and then I started writing React,
where you, with React specifically,
which is not the same as writing HTML.
But React requires it, so
that's why I got back in the habit
of putting it again, so
up to you I think is the answer.
Good question, anyone else, yes?
>> off screen male: In your example
where you have the word hi,
you have the hi on a separate line from
h1 and the closing bracket on each one.
Does it have to be on a separate line,
or can they all be on one single line?
All the h1, opening and closing?
>> Brian Holt: So, I like that question,
thank you very much.
You can definitely do this,
right, is that your question?
This is totally valid HTML,
this will go through a browser and
it will work perfectly.
This is very hard to read, [LAUGH] so
the whitespace is what this is called.
>> Brian Holt: If I go back to here,
like this, this whitespace here, so
all these spaces and returns and
things like that, it's meaningless.
It doesn't actually do anything,
it's purely for
you as a programmer to make
it more readable for you.
So this is far less dense, so it's easy
for my eye to peruse very quickly,
which is ultimately what I'm going for.
So even though there's
a bunch of space here,
you'll notice that there's
no space before this.
HTML cuts off all of that space,
so that's a good question,
does that answer your question?
Cool, so it's purely for you.
>> Brian Holt: Other questions?
>> off screen female: I
have one more question.
>> Brian Holt: Please.
>> off screen female: So
what is div and when do you use it?
>> Brian Holt: I'll get to it,
just a second.
>> off screen female: Okay.
>> Brian Holt: But a good question, yeah?
>> off screen female: So when I do
the first h1, and I type in say h5,
it seems to input into the result the h5,
and it does highlight
the second h1 in red.
>> Brian Holt: Like this.
>> off screen female: It lets me do that,
yeah.
>> Brian Holt: That's a good question,
it's like what's happening here?
>> off screen female: Yeah.
>> Brian Holt: HTML, and
browsers in particular,
are very good at dealing with bad HTML.
Because we have decades of
bad programmers behind us,
and good programmers, but
also bad programmers.
This used to be called quirks mode,
[LAUGH] anyone that had to deal with
quirks mode will probably get
a little bit of PTSD right now.
[LAUGH] But the short answer to it is,
I don't actually know how
it's going to handle this.
But the browser is very resilient and will
try to recover from mistakes like that.
So this being red right here,
this has a syntax highlighter on it,
that's why this is green and
this is black.
And so that's the syntax highlighter
breaking, that's why it's red right there.
This looks like it's actually
being rendered as an H5.
Yeah, so
it looks like this is respecting the H5,
which means that Firefox in this
particular case is respecting it as an H5.
>> Brian Holt: Good question though.
>> Brian Holt: Yeah, I think the sum of
the story is that the browser will do its
best to recover.
>> Brian Holt: And does a pretty good job.